I leave you, to go the road we all must go.  The road I would choose, if only I could, is the other.
At the sound of the wind, bringing dews to Miyagi Plain,  I think of the tender hagi* upon the moor.
The autumn night is too short to contain my tears Though songs of bell cricket weary, fall into silence.
Sad are the insect songs among the reeds.  More sadly yet falls the dew from above the clouds.
The tree that gave them shelter has withered and died.  One fears for the plight of the hagi shoots beneath.
And will no wizard search her out for me,  That even he may tell me where she is?
Tears dim the moon, even here above the clouds.  Dim must it be in that lodging among the reeds.
The boyish locks are now bound up, a man's.  And do we tie a lasting bond for his future?
Fast the knot which the honest heart has tied.  May lavender, the hue of the troth, be as fast.
I count them over, the many things between us.  One finger does not, alas, count the sum of your failures.
I have counted them up myself, be assured, my failures.  For one bitten finger must all be bitten away?
Uncommonly fine this house, for moon, for koto.  Does it bring to itself indifferent callers as well?
No match the leaves for the angry winter winds.  Am I to detain the flute that joins those winds?
The fence of the mountain rustic may fall to the ground.  Rest gently. O dew, upon the wild carnation.
No bloom in this wild array would I wish to slight.  But dearest of all to me is the wild carnation.
Dew wets the sleeve that brushes the wild carnation.  The tempest rages. Now comes autumn too.
The spider must have told you I would come.  Then why am I asked to keep company with garlic?
Were we two who kept company every night,  What would be wrong with garlic in the daytime?
Why must they startle with their dawn alarums  When hours are yet required to thaw the ice?
Day has broken without an end to my tears,  To my cries of sorrow are added the calls of the cocks.
I yearn to dream again the dream of that night.  The nights go by in lonely wakefulness.
I wander lost in the Sonohara moorlands,  For I did not know the deceiving ways of the broom tree.
Here and not here. I lie in my shabby hut.  Would that I might like the broom tree vanish away.
Beneath a tree, a locust's empty shell.  Sadly I muse upon the shell of a lady.
The dew upon the fragile locust wing 
Is lost among the leaves. Lost are my tears.
Come a bit nearer, please. Then might you know  Whose was the evening face so dim in the twilight.
Though loath to be taxed with seeking fresher blooms,  I feel impelled to pluck this morning glory.
In haste to plunge into the morning mists,  You seem to have no heart for the blossoms here.
This pious one shall lead us on our way  As we plight our troth for all the lives to come.
So heavy the burden I bring with me from the past,  I doubt that I should make these vows for the future.
And did it confuse them too, the men of old,  This road through the dawn, for me so new and strange?
And is the moon, unsure of the hills it approaches,  Foredoomed to lose its way in the empty skies?
Because of one chance meeting by the wayside  The flower now opens in the evening dew.
The face seemed quite to shine in the evening dew,  But I was dazzled by the evening light.
One sees the clouds as smoke that rose from the pyre,  And suddenly the evening sky seems nearer.
Time goes by, you ask not why I ask not.  Think if you will how lonely a life is mine.
Hollow though it was, the shell of the locust  Gave me strength to face a gloomy world.
I bound them loosely, the reeds beneath the eaves,  And reprove them now for having come undone.
The wind brings words, all softly, to the reed,  And the under leaves are nipped again by the frost.
I weep and weep as today I tie this cord.  It will be untied in an unknown world to come.
A keepsake till we meet again,I had hoped, And see,my tears have rotted the sleeves away.
Autumn comes, the wings of the locust are shed.  A summer robe returns, and I weep aloud.
The one has gone, to the other I say farewell.  They go their unknown ways. The end of autumn.
Are these tender grasses to grow without the dew  Which holds itself back from the heavens that would receive it?
It cannot be that the dew will vanish away  Ere summer comes to these early grasses of spring.
Since first the wanderer glimpsed the fresh young grasses  His sleeves have known no respite from the dew.
The dew of a night of travel―do not compare it  With the dew that soaks the sleeves of the mountain dweller.
A wind strays down from the hills to end my dream,  And tears well forth at these voices upon the waters.
These waters wet your sleeves. Our own are dry,  And tranquil our hearts, washed clean by mountain waters.
I shall say to my city friends: 'Make haste to see  Those mountain blossoms. The winds may see them first.
In thirty hundreds of years it blooms but once.  My eyes have seen it, and spurn these mountain cherries.
My mountain door of pine has opened briefly  To see a radiant flower not seen before.
Having come upon an evening blossom,  The mist is loath to go with the morning sun.
Can we believe the mist to be so reluctant?  We shall watch the morning sky for signs of truth.
The mountain blossoms are here beside me still.  All of myself I left behind with them.
Brief as the time till the autumn tempests come  To scatter the flowers―so brief your thoughts of her.
No Shallow Spring, this heart of mine believe me.  And why must the mountain spring then seem so distant?
You drink at the mountain stream, your thoughts turn elsewhere.  Do you hope to see the image you thus disturb?
So few and scattered the nights, so few the dreams.  Would that the dream tonight might take me with it.
Were I to disappear in the last of dreams  Would yet my name live on in infamy?
Seeking to follow the call of the nestling crane  The open boat is lost among the reeds.
I long to have it, to bring it in from the moor,  The lavender that shares its roots with another.
Rushes hide the sea grass at Wakanoura.  Must the waves that seek it out turn back to sea?
The grass at Wakanoura were rash indeed  To follow waves that go it knows not whither.
Lost though I seem to be in the mists of dawn,  I see your gate, and cannot pass it by.
So difficult to pass? Then do come in.  No obstacle at all, this gate of grass.
Thick are the dewy grasses of Musashi,  Near this grass to the grass I cannot have.
I do not know what it is that makes you sigh.  And whatever grass can it be I am so near to?
Though together we left the heights of Mount Ouchi,  This moon of the sixteenth night has secret ways.
It sheds its rays impartially here and there,  And who should care what mountain it sets behind?
Countless times your silence has silenced me.  My hope is that you hope for something better.
I cannot ring a bell enjoining silence.  Silence, strangely, is my only answer.
Silence. I know, is finer by far than words.  Its sister, dumbness, at times is rather painful.
The gloomy evening mists have not yet cleared,  And now comes rain, to bring still darker gloom.
My village awaits the moon on a cloudy night.  You may imagine the gloom, though you do not share it.
In the morning sun the icicles melt at the eaves.  Why must the ice below refuse to melt?
My sleeves are no less wet in the morning snow Than the sleeves of this man who wears a crown snow.
Always, always my sleeve is wet like these.  Wet because you are so very cold.
Red is not. I fear, my favorite color.  Then why did I let the safflower stain my sleeve?
This robe of pink, but new to the dyer's hand:  Do not soil it, please, beyond redemption.
Layer on layer, the nights when I do not see you.  And now these garments-layers yet thicker between us?
The red of the florid nose fails somehow to please,  Though one longs for red on these soaring branches of plum.
Through the waving, dancing sleeves could you see a heart  So stormy that it wished but to be still?"
Of waving Chinese sleeves I cannot speak.  Each step, each motion, touched me to the heart.
 What legacy do we bring from former lives  That loneliness should be our lot in this one?
 Sad at seeing the child, sad at not seeing.  The heart of the father, the mother, lost in darkness.
 It resembles you. I think, this wild carnation,  Weighted with my tears as with the dew.
 It serves you ill, the Japanese carnation,  To make you weep. Yet I shall not forsake it.
  Sere and withered though these grasses be,  They are ready for your pony, should you come.
 Were mine to part the low bamboo at your grove,  It would fear to be driven away by other ponies.
 No one waits in the rain at my eastern cottage.  Wet are the sleeves of the one who waits within.
 On closer terms with the eaves of your eastern cottage  I would not be, for someone is there before me.
 Your fickle name so wants to be known to the world  That it bursts its way through this warmly disputed garment.
 You taunt me, sir, with being a spectacle When you know full well that your own summer robes are showy.
 I need not comment now upon my feelengs. The waves that came in together went out together,
 I shall not complain of the wave that came raging in,  But of the welcoming strand I must complain.
 Not to be charged with having taken your take,  I return this belt of indigo undamaged.
 I doubted not that you took my indigo belt, And charge you now with taking the lady too.
 I see her disappear behind the clouds  And am left to grope my way through deepest darkness.
Could I see the blossom as other blossoms,  Then would there be no dew to cloud my heart.
Late in the night we enjoy a misty moon.  There is nothing misty about the bond between us.
Were the lonely one to vanish quite away,  Would you go to the grassy moors to ask her name?
I wish to know whose dewy lodge it is  Ere winds blow past the bamboo-tangled moor.
I had not known the sudden loneliness  Of having it vanish, the moon in the sky of dawn.
If these blossoms of mine were of the common sort,  Would I press you so to come and look upon them?
I wander lost on Arrow Mount and ask:  May I not see the moon I saw so briefly?
Only the flighty, the less than serious ones,  Are left in the skies when the longbow moon is gone
A distant glimpse of the River of Lustration.  His coldness is the measure of my sorrow.
Mine it shall be, rich as the grasses beneath  The fathomless sea, the thousand-fathomed sea.
It may indeed be a thousand fathoms deep.  How can I know, when it restlessly comes and goes?
Ah, the fickleness! It summoned me  To a meeting, the heartvine now worn by another.
Yes, fickleness, this vine of the day of meeting,  Available to all the eighty clans.
Vine of meeting indeed! A useless weed,  A mouthing, its name, of empty promises.
I go down the way of love and dampen my sleeves,  And go yet further, into the muddy fields.
You only dip into the shallow waters,  And I quite disappear into the slough?
Bind the hem of my robe, to keep it within,  The grieving soul that has wandered through the skies.
>Might these clouds be the smoke that mounts from her pyre?  They fill my heart with feelings too deep for words.
Weeds obey rules Mine are the shallower hue.  But tears plunge my sleeves Into the deepest wells.
I too am in tears, at the thought of her sad, short life.  Moist the sleeves of you whom she left behind.
We go, we stay, alike of this world of dew.  We should not let it have such a hold upon us.
Is she the rain? Where in these stormy skies,  To which of these brooding clouds may I look to find her?
It is a time of storms when even the clouds  To which my lady has risen are blotted away.
Carnations at the wintry hedge remind me  Of an autumn which we leave too far behind.
I see them, and my sleeves are drenched afresh,  The wild carnations at the wasted hedge.
Many a desolate autumn have I known,  But never have my tears flowed as tonight.
I knew that the autumn mists had faded away,  And looked for you in the stormy autumn skies.
Weeping beside the pillow of one who is gone,  I may not go, so strong the ties, myself.
The dust piles on the now abandoned bed.  How many dew-drenched nights have I slept alone!
Many have been the nights we have spent together  Purposelessly, these coverlets between us.
Yet once again I put on robes for the new,  And tears are falling for all that went with the old.
The New Year brings renewal, I know, and yet  The same old tears still flow from the same old woman.
You err with your sacred tree and sacred gate.  No beckoning cedars stand before my house.
Thinking to find you here with the holy maidens,  I followed the scent of the leaf of the sacred tree.
A dawn farewell is always drenched in dew,  But sad is the autumn sky as never before.
An autumn farewell needs nothing to make it sadder.  Enough of your songs, O crickets on the moors!
If my lady the priestess, surveying her manifold realms.  Has feelings for those below, let her feel for me.
If a lord of the land is watching from above.  This pretense of sorrow will not have escaped his notice.
Tue things of the past are always of the past.  I would not think of them. Yet sad is my heart.
You throw me off; but will they not wet your sleeves,  The eighty waves of the river Suzuka?
And who will watch us all the way to Ise,  To see if those eighty waves have done their work?
I see her on her way. Do not, O mists,  This autumn close off the Gate of the Hill of Meeting.
Withered the pine whose branches gave us shelter?  Now at the end of the year its needles fall.
Clear as a mirror these frozen winter waters.  The figure they once reflected is no more.
At the end of the year the springs are silenced by ice.  And gone are they whom we saw among the rocks.
They say that it is dawn, that you grow weary.  I weep, my sorrows wrought by myself alone.
You tell me that these sorrows must not cease?  My sorrows, my love will neither have an ending.
If other days must be as this has been,  I still shall be weeping two and three lives hence.
Remember that the cause is in yourself  Of a sin which you say I must bear through lives to come.
In lodgings frail as the dew upon the reeds  I left you, and the four winds tear at me.
Weak as the spider's thread upon the reeds,  The dew-drenched reeds of autumn, I blow with the winds.
The gods will not wish me to speak of them, perhaps,  But I think of sacred cords of another autumn.
Another autumn―what can this refer to?  A secret hoard of thoughts of sacred cords?
Ninefold mists have risen and come between us.  I am left to imagine the moon beyond the clouds.
The autumn moon is the autumn moon of old.  How cruel the mists that will not let me see it.
Anxious, restless days. A gust of wind,  And yet another, bringing no word from you.
Deceive yourself not into thinking them autumn showers,  The tears I weep in hopeless longing to see you.
We greet once more the day of the last farewell,  And when, in what snows, may we hope for a day of meeting?
To live these months without him has been sorrow.  But today seems to bring a return of the days of old.
My heart is with her in the moonlight above the clouds,  And yet it stays with you in this darker world.
Though I leave behind a world I cannot endure,  My heart remains with him, till of that world.
Briny my sleeves at the pines of Urashima  As those of the fisherfolk who take the sea grass.
How strange that waves yet come to Urashima,  When all the things of old have gone their way.
I might have met the first lily of spring,he says. I look upon a flower no less pleasing.
The plant of which you speak bloomed very briefly.  It opened at dawn to wilt in the summer rains,
Back at the fence where once it sang so briefly,  The cuckoo is impelled to sing again.
It seems to be a cuckoo we knew long ago.  But alas, under rainy skies we cannot be sure.
It catches the scent of memory, and favors  The village where the orange blossoms fall.
The orange blossoms at the eaves have brought you  To a dwelling quite forgotten by the world.
There on the shore, the salt burners' fires await me.  Will their smoke be as the smoke over Toribe Moor?
Farther retreats the day when we bade her goodbye,  For now you depart the skies that received the smoke.
I now must go into exile In this mirror  An image of me will yet remain beside you.
If when we part an image yet remains,  Then will I find some comfort in my sorrow.
Narrow these sleeves, now lodging for the moonlight.  Would they might keep a light which I do not tire of.
The moon will shine upon this house once more.  Do not look at the clouds which now conceal it:
Snagged upon the shoals of this river of tears,  I cannot see you. Deeper waters await me.
The foam on the river of tears will disappear  Short of the shoals of meeting that wait downstream.
The one whom I served is gone, the other must go.  Farewell to the world was no farewell to its sorrows.
The worst of grief for him should long have passed.  And now I must leave the world where dwells the child.
There was heartvine in our caps. I led your horse.  And now at this jeweled fence I berate the gods.
I leave this world of gloom. I leave my name  To the offices of the god who rectifies.
And how does he look upon me? I raise my eyes.  And the moon now vanishes behind the clouds.
When shall I, a ragged, rustic outcast,  See again the blossoms of the city?
Quickly the blossoms fall. Though spring departs,  You will come again. I know, to a city of flowers.
At least for this life we might make our vows, we thought.  And so we vowed that nothing would ever part us.
I would give a life for which I have no regrets  If it might postpone for a little the time of parting.
More remote I fear, my place of exile  Than storied ones in lands beyond the seas.
Mountain mists cut off that ancient village.  Is the sky I see the sky that shelters it?
Briny our sleeves on the Suma strand; and yours  In the fisher cots of thatch at Matsushima?
At Suma unchastened, one longs for the deep-lying sea pine.  And she, the fisher lady burning salt?
The nun of Matsushima burns the brine  And fuels the fires with the logs of her lamenting,
The fisherwife burns salt and hides her fires  And strangles, for the smoke has no escape.
Taking brine on that strand, let him compare  His dripping sleeves with these night sleeves of mine.
Imagine, at Suma of the dripping brine,  The woman of Ise, gathering briny sea grass.
The tide recedes along the coast of Ise.  No hope, no promise in the empty shells.
With the lady of Ise I might have ridden small boats  That row the waves, and avoided dark sea tangles.
How long, dripping brine on driftwood logs,  On logs of lament, must I gaze at this Suma coast?
Ferns of remembrance weigh cur eaves ever more,  And heavily falls the dew upon our sleeves.
The waves on the strand, like moans of helpless longing.  The winds―like messengers from those who grieve?
Might they be companions of those I long for?  Their cries ring sadly through the sky of their journey.
I know not why they bring these thoughts of old,  These wandering geese. They were not then my comrades.
No colleagues of mine, these geese beyond the clouds.  They chose to leave their homes, and I did not.
Sad are their cries as they wing their way from home.  They still find solace, for they still have comrades.
So long as I look upon it I find comfort,  The moon which comes again to the distant city.
Not bitter thoughts alone does this singlet bring.  Its sleeves are damp with tears of affection too.
Now taut, now slack, like my unruly heart,  The tow rope is suddenly still at the sound of a koto.
Why, if indeed your heart is like the tow rope,  Unheeding must you pass this strand of Suma?
Over and over the rural ones light fires.  Not so unflagging the urban ones with their visits.
All aimless is my journey through the clouds.  It shames me that the unswerving moon should see me.
.Cries of plovers in the dawn bring comfort  To one who awakens in a lonely bed.
Fond thoughts I have of the noble ones on high,  And the day of the flowered caps has come again.
In what spring tide will I see again my old village?  I envy the geese, returning whence they came
Sad are the geese to leave their winter's lodging.  Dark my way of return to the flowery city.
Look down upon me, cranes who skim the clouds,  And see me unsullied as this cloudless day.
Lonely the voice of the crane among the clouds.  Gone the comrade that once flew at its side.
Cast away to drift on an alien vastness,  I grieve for more than a doll cast out to sea.
You eight hundred myriad gods must surely help me,  For well you know that blameless I stand before you.
What do they work, the sea winds down at Suma?  At home, my sleeves are assaulted by wave after wave.
Without the staying hand of the king of the sea  The roar of the eight hundred waves would have taken us under.
Yet farther away, upon the beach at Akashi,  My thoughts of a distant city, and of you.
Awaji in the moonlight, like distant foam:  From these cloudly sovereign heights it seems so near.
Do you too know the sadness of the nights  On the shore of Akashi with only thoughts for companions?
The traveler passes fretful nights at Akashi.  The grass which he reaps for his pillow reaps no dreams.
Do I catch, as I gaze into unresponsive skies,  A glimpse of a grove of which I have had certain tidings?
She gazes into the skies into which you gaze.  May they bring your thoughts and hers into some accord.
Unwillingly reticent about my sorrows  I still must be―for no one makes inquiry.
Unwillingly reticent―how can it be so?  How can you sorrow for someone you have not met?
Race on through the moonlit sky. O roan-colored horse.  And let me be briefly with her for whom I long.
Would there were someone with whom I might share my thoughts  And so dispel some part of these sad dreams.
You speak to one for whom the night has no end.  How can she tell the dreaming from the waking?
It was but the fisherman's brush with the salty sea pine  Followed by a tide of tears of longing.
Naive of me, perhaps; yet we did make our vows.  And now see the waves that wash the Mountain of Waiting!
Even though we now must part for a time,  The smoke from these briny fires will follow me.
Smoldering thoughts like the sea grass burned on these shores.  And what good now to ask for anything more?
One heedless word, one koto, to set me at rest.  In the sound of it the sound of my weeping, forever.
Do not change the middle string* of this koto,  Unchanging I shall be till we meet again.
Sad the retreating waves at leaving this shore.  Sad I am for you, remaining after.
You leave, my reed-roofed hut will fall to ruin.  Would that I might go out with these waves.
I made it for you, but the surging brine has wet it.  And might you find it unpleasant and cast it off?
Take it. this middle robe, let it be the symbol  Of days uncounted but few between now and then.
Though weary of life, seasoned by salty winds,  I am not able to leave this shore behind,
I wept upon leaving the city in the spring.  I weep in the autumn on leaving this home by the sea.
Cast out upon the sea. I passed the years  As useless as the leech child of the gods.
The leech child's parents met beyond the pillar.  We meet again to forget the spring of parting.
I wonder, do the morning mists yet rise,  There at Akashi of the lonely nights?
There once came tidings from a boat at Suma,  From one who now might show You sodden sleeves.
It is I, not you, from whom the complaints should come.  My sleeves have refused to dry since last you wrote.
I have not, it is true, been so fortunate as to know you,  But sad it is to end the briefest friendship.
I do not trust regrets at so quick a farewell.  The truth has to do with someone you wish to visit.
One day this sleeve of mine shall be her shelter  Whose years shall be as the years of the angel's rock.
These sleeves are much too narrow to offer protection.  The blossom awaits those all-encompassing ones.
I think I shall be the first to rise as smoke,  And it may not go the direction of that other.
For whom, in mountains, upon unfriendly seas,  Has the flow of my tears been such as to sweep me under?
The sea grass, hidden among the rocks, unchanging,  Competes this day for attention with the iris.
The crane is lost on an insignificant isle.  Not even today do you come to seek it out.
Did not this bird come knocking at my door,  What pretext would I find to admit the moon?
You respond to the call of every water rail?  You must find yourself admitting peculiar moons.
These pines of Sumiyoshi make me think  Of days when we were neighbors to this god.
Remembering those fearful winds and waves,  Am I to forget the god of Sumiyoshi?
Firm the bond that brings us to Naniwa,  Whose channel buoys invite me to throw myself in.
A lowly one whose place is not to demand,  To what purpose, at Naniwa, should I cast myself in?
My sleeves are wet as when I wandered these shores.  The Isle of the Raincoat does not fend off the dews.
From skies of wild, unceasing snow and sleet  Her spirit watches over a house of sorrow.
I wish to go, but, blind with tears, am helpless  As snows which were not asked where they would fall.
I had counted upon them not to slacken or give,  These jeweled strands―and far off now they are borne.
The jeweled strands may snap, but I swear by the gods,  The gods of the road, that I will not cast them off.
My sleeves still wet from tears for him who died  Are wetter yet from rain through ruined eaves.
Myself will I break a path through towering weeds  And ask: does a constant spirit dwell within?
I obey the waving summons of wisteria  Because it flows, at your gate, from the waiting tree.
I have waited and waited, to no avail, it seems.  Wisteria, not the waiting pine, has brought you.
It flowed as I went, it flows as I return,  The steady crystal spring at the barrier rise.
By chance we met, beside the gate of meeting.  A pity its fresh waters should be so sterile.
The gate of meeting, atop the barrier rise,  Is shaded by impassable wailing groves.
I gave you combs and sent you far away.  The god now sends me far away from you?
Long ago, one word you said: Away!  Sorry now am I that I paid no heed.
Better to see these strands where the fishermen dwell  Than far away to weep, all, all alone.
Now more than in those painful days I weep  As tracings of them bring them back to me.
Shall we forget how deep is the sea of Ise  Because the waves have washed away old tracks?
To this Josammi, high above august clouds,  The thousand-fathomed sea seems very shallow.
At first the strands of sea grass may seem old,  But the fisherfolk of Ise are with us yet.
Though now I dwell beyond the sacred confines.  My heart is there committing you to the gods.
Within these sacred precincts all has changed.  Fondly I think of the days when I served the gods.
The old weep easily. and I am weeping  As I pray that for her the happy years stretch on.
Together we left the city. Alone I return,  To wander lost over hill and over moor?
When do you say that we shall meet again,  Trusting a life that is not ours to trust?
I want to be a fisherwife upon  A far, clean shore, and now my boat turns back.
How many autumns now upon this strand?  So many, why should this flotsam now return?
I have returned alone, a nun, to a mountain village,  And hear the wind in the pines of long ago.
I long for those who know the country sounds,  And listen to my koto, and understand.
The mistress, long gone, is lost upon her return  To find that the brook has quite usurped her claims.
Clean waters, bringing back the distant past  To one who comes to them in somber habit.
Unchanged it is when now we meet again.  And do you not see changelessness in me?
Your promise not to change was my companion.  I added my sighs to those of the wind in the pines.
Cleaner, more stately the progress of the moon  Through regions beyond the river Katsura.
It Is not true to its name, this Katsura.  There is not moon enough to dispel the mists.
So near and clear tonight, is it the moon  Of far Awaji? We both have come back.
All should now be peace. Then lost in clouds  The moon sends forth again its radiance.
The midnight moon should still be in the heavens.  Gone is its radiance―-hidden in what valley?
These mountain paths will be closed by snow and clouds.  Do not, I pray you, let your tracks be lost.
And were you to move to deepest Yoshino,  I still would find you, through unceasing snow.
It is taken away, the seedling pine, so young.  When shall I see it grandly shading the earth?
A seedling, yes, but with the roots to give  The thousand years of the pines of Takekuma.
We shall see if you are back tomorrow,  If no one there essays to take your boat.
I go but for a while, and shall return  Though she may wish I had not come at all.
A rack of cloud across the light of evening  As if they too, these hills, wore mourning weeds.
Then we two feel alike. You know my secret:  For me it is the autumn winds that pierce.
The torches bobbing with the fisher boats  Upon those waves have Followed me to Oi.
Only one who does not know deep waters  Can still be bobbing, dancing on those waves.
One does indeed wait long and cheerless months  In hopes the gods will someday give their blessing.
The gods will tell me I have broken my vows  For having had the briefest talk with you.
I do not forget the morning glory I saw.  Will the years, I wonder, have taken it past its bloom?
The morning glory, wholly changed by autumn,  Is lost in the tangle of the dew-drenched hedge.
And when did wormwood overwhelm this gate,  This hedge, now under snow, so go to ruin?
I do not forget that bond, though years have passed,  For did you not choose to call me Mother's mother?
Suppose we wait for another world to tell us  Of instances of a child's forgetting a parent.
Long years of coldness have not chastened me,  And now I add resentment to resentment.
I could not change if I wished at this late date.  I know that others do, but I cannot.
The water is stilled among the frozen rocks.  A clear moon moves into the western sky.
A night of drifting snow and memories  Is broken by another note of sadness.
A winter's night, I awaken from troubled sleep.  And what a brief and fleeting dream it was!
I fear, in my longing, to go in search of her  And find not her shade on the banks of the River of Death.
I did not think that when the waters returned  It would be to take away the weeds of mourning.
How quick the change. Deep mourning yesterday,  Today the shallow waters of lustration.
The midnight call to its fellows in the clouds  Comes in upon the wind that rustles the reeds,
These sleeves are crimson, dyed with tears of blood.  How can she say that they are lowly blue?
My life is dyed with sorrows of several hues.  Pray tell me which is the hue of the part we share.
It is a world made grim by frost and ice,  And now come tears to darken darkened skies.
The lady who serves Toyooka in the heavens  Is not to forget that someone thinks of her here.
What will the years have done to the maiden, when he  Who saw her heavenly sleeves is so much older?
Garlands in my hair, warm sun to melt the frost,  So very long ago. It seems like yesterday.
Were you aware of it as you danced in the sunlight,  The heart that was pinned upon the heavenly sleeves?
The warblers are today as long ago,  But we in the shade of the blossoms are utterly changed.
Though kept by mists from the ninefold-garlanded court.  I yet have warblers to tell me spring has come.
The tone of the flute is as it always has been,  Nor do I detect a change in the song of the warbler.
The warbler laments as it flies from tree to tree― For blossoms whose hue is paler than once it was?
Your garden quietly awaits the spring.  Permit the winds to bring a touch of autumn.
Fleeting, your leaves that scatter in the wind.  The pine at the cliffs is forever green with the spring.
To whom might it be that the thoughts of these sailors turn,  Sadly singing off the Oshima strand?
To whom might it be that the thoughts of these sailors turn,  Sadly singing off the Oshima strand?
I vow to the Mirror God of Matsura:  If I break it he can do what he wants with me.
It will be for us to reproach the Mirror God  If our prayers of so many years remain unanswered.
Shores of trial, now gloomy Ukishima.  On we sail. Where next will be our lodging?
We sail vast seas and know not where we go  Floating ones, abandoned to the winds.
The echoes of Echo Bay are slight and empty  Beside the tumult I hear within myself.
Had I not come to the place of cedars twain, How should I have met you here beside the old river?
I know little, I fear, about the swift old river,  But I know the flow of tears of happiness.
You may not know, but presently you will,  Where leads the line of rushes at Mishimae.
You speak of lines and rushes―and by what line  Has this poor rush taken root in this sad world?
With unabated longing I sought the other.  What lines have drawn me to the jeweled chaplet?
Tearfully I don this Chinese robe.  And having dampened its sleeves, I now return it.
'Return,' you say―-ah, 'turn,' I see you mean,  Your Chinese robe, prepared for lonely slumber.
The mirror of this lake, now freed from ice.  Offers an image of utter peace and calm.
Upon the cloudless mirror of this lake,  Clear is the image, for ten thousand years.
The old one's gaze rests long on the seedling pine,  Waiting to hear the song of the first warbler,
The warbler left its nest long years ago,  But cannot forget the roots of the waiting pine.
Such happiness! The warbler among the blossoms  Calls across the glen to its old nest.
I stop to look at the groves of my old village,  And the blossom I see reminds me of a safflower.
The breezes blow, the wave flowers brightly blossom.  Will it be the Cape of Yamabuki?
Is this the lake where flows the River of Ide, †  That yamabuki should plunge into its depths?
There is no need to visit Turtle Mountain. ‡  'Ageless' shall be the name of our pleasure boats.
Our boats row out into the bright spring sun,  And water drops from the oars like scattering petals.
Lavender holds me and puts me in mind of things.  I mean, let them say what they will, to throw myself in.
Please hold yourself In abeyance beneath these flowers,  To judge if the plunge would have the proper effect.
Low in your grasses the cricket awaits the autumn  And views with scorn these silly butterflies.
I weep in my longing to follow your butterflies.  You put up fences of yamabuki between us.
You cannot know how deep my feelings are.  Their colors are hidden, like waters among the rocks.
The bamboo so firmly rooted within our hedges  Will send out distant shoots to please its convenience?
Why should the young bamboo at this late date  Go forth in search of roots it has left behind,
Scented by orange blossoms long ago,  The sleeve she wore is surely the sleeve you wear.
The sleeve bears the scent of that blossom long ago.  Then might not the fruit as quickly vanish away?
Although I scarcely saw the tender grasses,  They look as if I had tied them all in knots.
You put out this silent fire to no avail.  Can you extinguish the fire in the human heart?
The firefly but burns and makes no comment.  Silence sometimes tells of deeper thoughts.
Even today the iris is neglected.  Its roots, my cries, are lost among the waters.
It might have flourished better in concealment,  The iris root washed purposelessly away.
You honor the iris on the bank to which  No pony comes to taste of withered grasses?
This pony, like the love grebe, wants a comrade.  Shall it forget the iris on the bank?
Beside myself, I search through all the books,  And come upon no daughter so unfilial.
So too it is with me. I too have searched,  And found no cases quite so unparental.
Were he to see its gentle hues unchanging,  Would he not come to the hedge of the wild carnation?
Who would come to seek the wild carnation  That grew at such a rough and rustic hedge?
Cape How of the grassy pastures of Hitachi  Says how can the waves of Farmer Beach come see you.
You waves of the Suma coast of Suruga- Hitachi, the pine of Hakosaki waits.
They burn, these flares and my heart, and send off smoke.  The smoke from my heart refuses to be dispersed.
If from your heart and the flares the smoke is the same,  Then one might expect it to find a place in the heavens.
Even the wind that rustles the leaves of the reeds  Is with me longer in my lonely vigil.
The tempest blows, the maiden flower has fears  That the time has come for it to fade and die.
If it gives itself up to the dew beneath the tree,  It need not fear, the maiden flower, the winds.
Even on a night of raging tempests  I did not forget the one whom I do not forget.
Deep in the snows of this Mount Oshio  Are ancient pheasant tracks. Would you might see them.
The snows beneath the pines of Oshio  Have never known so mighty a company.
Amid deep snows upon a day of clouds  How does one see the radiance far above?
The crimson glow is there in a cloudless sky.  Have you let yourself be blinded by the snow?
Whatever lid the jeweled comb box bears,  I still shall think it no one's box but mine.
How very unhappy I am, for my Chinese sleeves  Cannot be friends with the sleeves of your Chinese robe.
A Chinese robe, a Chinese robe once more,  And yet again a Chinese Chinese robe.
Bitter, bitter, that the fisherfolk  So long have hidden the treasures of the sea.
The fisherfolk refusing to take them in,  The grasses drifted ashore as best they might.
Dew drenched purple trousers: I grieve as you do.  And long for the smallest hint that you understand.
It grew, if you ask, in the dews of a distant moor.  That purple is false which tells of anything nearer.
I did not know it was Sibling Mountain we climbed,  And came to a halt on hostile Odae Bridge.
Not knowing that you did not know, i found  Your tracks up sibling mountain strange indeed.
Hateful the Long Month* to those who are sure of themselves.  I hang, as if for my life, on each fleeting day.
Warm though it be in the radiant morning sun,  Let the jeweled bamboo not forget the frost beneath.
Difficult it is to try to forget.  What shall I do about you, about myself?
Not the sunflower, choosing to follow the sun,  Forgets so soon the morning frost beneath.
I made no move myself to try the river,  But I did not think to see you cross with another.
I wish I might vanish as foam on a river of tears.  Before I come to the river Mitsuse.
I lie in the cold embrace of my own sleeves.  Turmoil in the skies and in my heart.
Alone with thoughts which are too much for her,  She has let unquenchable embers do their work.
These dread events so fill me with rage and regret  That I too choke from the fumes that rise within me.
And now I leave this house behind forever.  Do not forget me, friendly cypress pillar.
Even if it wishes to be friends,  We may not stay behind at this cypress pillar.
The waters, though shallow, remain among the rocks,  And gone is the image of one who would stay beside them.
The water among the rocks has clouded over,  I do not think my shadow long will linger.
You fly off wing to wing through mountain forests,  And in this nest of mine it is lonely spring.
Why should I be drawn to lavender  So utterly remote and uncongenial?
I know not the meaning of this lavender,  Though finding in it marks of august grace.
Invisible beyond the ninefold mists,  May not the plum blossom leave its scent behind?
I count not myself among the finer branches,  Yet hope that the fragrance may float upon the breeze.
A quiet night in spring. It rains and rains.  Do your thoughts retum to the village you left behind?
It rains and rains. My sleeves have no time to dry.  Of forgetfulness there comes not the tiniest drop.
The yamabuki wears the hue of silence,  So sudden was the parting at Ide road．
I saw the duckling hatch and disappear.  Sadly I ask who may have taken it.
Off in a corner not counted among the nestlings,  It was hidden by no one. It merely picked up and left.
If you're a little boat with nowhere to go,  Just tell me where you're tied. I'll row out and meet you.
Not even a boatman driven off course by the winds  Would wish to make for so untamed a shore.
Its blossoms fallen, the plum is of no further use.  Let its fragrance sink into the sleeves of another.
The perfume must be hidden lest people talk,  But I cannot take my eye from so lovely a blossom.
The voice of the warbler lays a deeper spell  Over one already enchanted by the blossoms.
Honor us by sharing our blossoms this spring  Until you have taken on their hue and fragrance.
Sound your bamboo flute all through the night  And shake the plum branch where the warbler sleeps.
I thought we wished to protect them from the winds,  The blossoms you would have me blow upon madly.
Did not the mists intercede to dim the moonlight  The birds on these branches might burst into joyous blossom.
If she catches a scent of blossoms upon these robes.  My lady will charge me with having misbehaved.
I should have thought your lady might be pleased  To have you come home all flowers and brocades.
This coldness takes you the usual way of the world.  Am I the deviant, that I cannot forget you?
You cannot forget, and now you have forgotten.  You are the one who goes the way of the world.
Come join me in regrets for the passing of spring  And wisteria now aglow in the evening light.
I grope my way through the gathering shades of evening  With no great hopes of coming upon wisteria.
Let us blame the wisteria, of too pale a hue,  Though the pine has let itself be overgrown.
Tears have obscured the blossoms these many springs,  And now at length they open full before me.
Wisteria is like the sleeve of a maiden.  Lovelier when someone cares for it.
So shallow a river, flowing out to sea.  Why did so stout a fence permit it to pass?
Shallowness was one, but only one,  Among the traits that helped it pass the barrier.
Do not reprove me for the dripping sleeves  The whole world sees. I weary of wringing them dry.
This sprig of―what is it called?―this sprig in my cap.  So long it has been, I cannot think of the name.
The scholar armed with laurel should know its name.  He wears it, though he may not speak of it.
Did you suspect by so much as a mist of dew  That the azure bloom would one day be a deep purple?
What mist of dew could possibly fail to find it,  Though pale its hue, in so eminent a garden?
Clearest of brooks, you guard these rocks, this house.  Where has she gone whose image you once reflected?
We see the image no more. How is it that  These pools among the rocks yet seem so happy?
The ancient pine is gone. That need not surprise us― For see how gnarled and mossy is its seedling.
I now am shaded by two splendid trees  Whose roots were intertwined when they were seedlings.
Though time has deepened the hue of the bloom at the hedge,  I do not forget how sleeve brushed sleeve that autumn.
A purple cloud is this chrysanthemum,  A beacon star which shines upon us all.
This aged peasant has known many autumn showers  And not before seen finer autumn colors.
Think you these the usual autumn colors?  Our garden brocade imitates an earlier one.
I fear these little combs are scarred and worn.  I have used them to summon back an ancient day.
I only hope that she may be as you,  All through the myriad years of the boxwood comb.
I come to pray that the rock may long endure  And I bring with me the seedling pines from the field.
Long shall be the life of the seedling pines― To add to the years of the herbs brought in from the fields?
I had grown so used to thinking it would not change.  And now, before my very eyes, it changes.
Life must end. It is a transient world.  The one thing lasting is the bond between us.
Not heavy enough to block the way between us.  The flurries of snow this morning yet distress me.
You do not come I fain would disappear,  A veil of snow upon the rough spring winds.
Deep into these mountains I would go,  But thoughts of one I leave still pull me back.
If your thoughts are upon the world you leave behind,  You should not make a point of cutting your ties.
So many years, and we meet at Meeting Barrier.  A barrier it remains, but not to my tears.
Though tears may flow as the spring at Meeting Hill,  The road between us was long ago blocked off.
I have not forgotten the depths into which I plunged,  And now these waves of wisteria seek to engulf me.
No waves at all of which to be so fearful.  My heart, unchastened, sends out waves to join them.
I detect a change in the green upon the hills.  Is autumn coming to them? Is it coming to me?
No change do we see in the white of the waterfowl.  Not so constant the lower leaves of the hagi.
Old waves come upon a friendly shore.  A nun's sleeves dripping brine―who can object?
The weeping nun must take me over the waves  To the reed-roofed cottage there upon the strand.
An old man leaves the world, and in his heart  Is darkness yet, * there on the Akashi strand.
The dawn is at hand. The radiance soon will pour forth.  I turn from it to speak of an ancient dream.
The generous warbler, moving from tree to tree.  Neglects the cherry alone among them all.
The cuckoo building its nest in mountain depths  Does not, be assured, neglect the cherry blossom.
The trees of sorrow seem denser from near at hand.  And my yearning grows for those blossoms in the twilight.
Do not let it be known. I pray of you,  That your eye has fallen on the mountain cherry.
You are here to remind me of someone I long for, and what is it you long for yourself?
You and I remember―and who else?  Only we can address these godly pines.
The aged fisherwife knows as not before  That Sumiyoshi is a place of joy.
It is a day I never shall forget.  This god of Sumiyoshi brings me joy.
So white these pines with frost in the dead of night.  Bedecked with sacred strands by the god himself?
Deep in the night the frost has added strands  To the sacred branches with which we make obeisance.
So white the frost, one takes it for sacred strands  And sees in it a sign of the holy blessing.
I arise and go forth in the dark before the dawn.  I know not where, nor whence came the dew on my sleeve.
Would I might fade away in the sky of dawn,  And all of it might vanish as a dream.
In secret, without leave, she brings this heartvine,  A most lamentable thing, a blasphemous thing.
Laurel branches twain, so near and like.  Why was it that I took the fallen leaf?
I am horribly changed, and you pretend not to know me.  You are the same.
It is a life in which we cannot be sure  Of lasting as long as the dew upon the lotus.
To be as close as the drops of dew on the lotus  Must be our promise in this world and the next.
The voice of the evening cicada says you must leave.  'Be moist with evening dews,' you say to my sleeves?
How do you think it sounds in yonder village,  The cicada that summons me there and summons me here?
I should not care that now you are a nun?  My sleeves were wet at Suma―because of you!
How comes it that the fisherman of Akashi  Has let the boat make off to sea without him?
My thoughts of you: will they stay when I am gone  Like smoke that lingers over the funeral pyre?
I wish to go with you, that we may see  Whose smoldering thoughts last longer, yours or mine.
As smoke I shall rise uncertainly to the heavens,  And yet remain where my thoughts will yet remain.
Should someone come asking when the seed was dropped,  What shall it answer, the pine among the rocks?
Although a branch of this cherry tree has withered,  It bursts into new bloom as its season comes.
The willow shoots this spring,not knowing where The petals may have fallen,are wet with dew.
Drenched by the fall from these trees, I mourn for a child  Who should in the natural order have mourned for me.
I doubt that he who left us wished it so,  That you should wear the misty robes of evening.
Bitter, bitter―whom can he have meant  To wear the misty robes ere the advent of spring?
By grace of the tree god let the branch so close  To the branch that withered be close to the branch that lives.
There may not be a god protecting the oak.  Think not, even so, its branches of easy access.
Away from the world, you follow after me,  And may we soon arrive at the same destination.
Longing for a place not of this world,  May I not join you in your mountain dwelling?
We cannot forget unpleasant associations.  We do not discard the young bamboo even so.
There is a shyness which is more affecting  Than any sound of word or sound of koto.
I feel the sadness, in the autumn night.  How can I speak of it if not through the koto?
The voices of insects are unchanged this autumn,  Rank though the grasses be round my dewy lodging.
The melody is as it always was.  The voices that mourn are inexhaustible.
If it matters not which wind sounds the bamboo flute,  Then let its note be forever with my children.
Separate drops of dew on the leaf of the lotus,  We vow that we will be one, on the lotus to come.
Together, you say, in the lotus dwelling to come.  But may you not have certain reservations?
The autumn is a time of deprivation.  I have thought―and yet have loved this cricket.
Although it has chosen to leave its grassy dwelling,  It cannot, this lovely insect, complain of neglect.
It does not forget, the moon of the autumn night,  A comer remote from that realm above the clouds.
In your cloud realm the moonlight is as always,  And here we see that autumn means neglect.
An evening mist―how shall I find my way?― Makes sadder yet a lonely mountain village.
The mists which enshroud this rustic mountain fence  Concern him only who is loathe to go.
Weeping and weeping, paraded before the world,  The one and only model of haplessness?
Had I not come inspiring all these tears,  The world would not have noticed your misfortunes?
Wet by dew-laden reeds beneath your eaves,  I now push forth into the eightfold mists?
Because these dewy grasses wet your sleeves  I too shall have wet sleeves-is that your meaning?
My heart is there in the sleeve of an unkind lady,  Quite without my guidance. I am helpless.
Shallow it is, for all these efforts to dam it.  You cannot dam and conceal so famous a flow.
You stay a single night. It means no more,  This field of sadly fading maiden flowers?
Although I made my way through thick autumn grasses,  I wove no pillow of grass for vagrant sleep.
Which emotion demands my sympathy,  Grief for the one or longing for the other?
I do not know the answer to your question.  The dew does not rest long upon the leaves.
I push my way through tangled groves to Ono.  Shall my laments, O stag, be softer than yours?
Dew-drenched wisteria robes* in autumn mountains.  Sobs to join the baying of the stag.
No shadows now of them whom once I knew.  Only the autumn moon to guard the waters.
Waking from the dream of an endless night  You said―and when may I pay my visit?
Morning and night, laments sound over Mount Ono  And Silent Waterfall―a flow of tears?
My choice would be to rise with the smoke from the peaks,  Which might perhaps not go in a false direction.
A small bejeweled box, now wet with tears,  To help me remember and seek elusive solace.
My sorrows linger as the winter night.  The stony barrier gate is as slow to open.
I do not complain that I am used and rejected.  Let me but go and join them at Matsushima.
Robes of Matsushima, soggy and worn,  For even them you may be held to account.
A bond from another life yet holds us together?  Fond thoughts I have, disquieting reports.
Disquieting reports, resentful thoughts― Of one who does not matter in the least?
The gloom I would know were I among those who matter  I see from afar. I weep in sympathy.
Many unhappy marriages I have seen,  And never felt them as I feel my own.
I have no regrets as I bid farewell to this life.  Yet the dying away of the fire is always sad.
Our prayers, the first of them borne in on brushwood,  Shall last the thousand years of the Blessed One's toils.
Although these holy rites must be my last,  The bond will endure for all the lives to come.
For all of us the time of rites is brief,  More durable by far the bond between us.
So briefly rests the dew upon the hagi.  Even now it scatters in the wind.
In the haste we make to leave this world of dew,  May there be no time between the first and last.
A world of dew before the autumn winds.  Not only theirs, these fragile leaves of grass.
I remember an autumn evening long ago  As a dream in the dawn when we were left behind.
It is as if that autumn had come again  And tears for the one were falling on tears for the other.
The dews of now are the dews of long ago,  And autumn is always the saddest time of all.
She did not like the autumn, that I knew― Because of the wasted moors that now surround us?
Look down upon me from your cloudy summit,  Upon the dying autumn which is my world.
And why has spring so graciously come to visit  A lodging where there is none to admire the blossoms?
You take me for the usual viewer of blossoms?  If that is so. I seek their fragrance in vain.
The snow will soon have left this gloomy world.  My days must yet go on, an aimless drifting.
The warbler has come again. It does not know  That the mistress of its tree is here no more.
Taking the final step, I must abandon  The springtime hedge that meant so much to her.
I wept and wept as I made my slow way homewards.  It is a world in which nothing lasts forever.
The wild goose has flown, the seedling rice is dry.  Gone is the blossom the water once reflected.
It is the day of the donning of summer robes,  And must there be a renewal of memories?
Thin as the locust's wing, these summer robes,  Reminders of the fragility of life.
With heartvine we garland our hair―and you forget!  All overgrown the urn, so long neglected.
The things of this world mean little to me now.  And yet I find myself reaching to break off heartvine.
Have you come, O cuckoo, drenched in nighttime showers,  In memory of her who is no more?
Go tell her this. O cuckoo: the orange blossoms  Where once she lived are now their loveliest.
I can but pass a summer's day in weeping.  Is that your pretext, O insects, for weeping too?
The firefly knows that night has come, and I― My thoughts do not distinguish night from day.
They meet these stars m a world beyond the clouds.  My tears but join the dews of the garden of parting.
This day, we are told, announces an end to mourning.  How can it be, when there is no end to tears?
The days are numbered for him who yet must mourn.  And are they numbered, the tears that yet remain?
On other mornings we took the elixir together.  This morning lonely sleeves are wet with dew.
O wizard flying off through boundless heavens,  Find her whom I see not even in my dreams.
Our lads go off to have their Day of Light. ‡  For me it is as if there were no sun
I seek to follow the tracks of a lady now gone  To another world. Alas, I lose my way.
I gather sea grasses no more, nor look upon them.  Now they are smoke, to join her in distant heavens.
Put blossoms in your caps today. Who knows  That there will still be life when spring comes round?
I pray that these blossoms may last a thousand springs,  For me the years are as the deepening snowdrifts.
I have not taken account of the days and months.  The end of the year―the end of a life as well?
Whom might I ask? Why must it be  That I do not know the beginning or the end?
A purposeful breeze wafts forth the scent of our plum.  Will not the warbler be first to heed the summons?
If I were one who followed inviting scents  Perhaps I might be summoned by the wind.
Ever fragrant, the royal sleeves touch the blossoms  And bring them into higher and higher repute.
Were I to follow the fragrance of the blossoms,  Might I not be accused of wantonness?
Come, young buds―a smile is what we need, To tell us that, taken in hand, you would be more fragrant.
A barren, blossomless tree. I have heard it called.  At heart it bursts even now into richest bloom.
Everyone is thinking of the blossoms,  And I am left alone in springtime darkness.
There is a time and place for everything.  The plum is not uniquely worthy of notice.
Deep down in the bamboo river we sang of  Did you catch an echo of deep intentions?
A word about a river and off you ran,  And left us to make what we would of unseemly haste.
They did not choose to come when I summoned them, And yet I tremble to see them go away.
A gust of wind, and promptly they are gone.  My grief is not intense at the loss of such weaklings.
These flowers must fall. It is the way of the world.  But do not demean the tree that came to me.
You have given yourselves to us, and now you fall  At the water's edge. Come drifting to us as foam.
The winds have sent them falling to the ground,  But I shall pick them up, for they are ours.
We have not sleeves that cover all the vast heavens.  We yet may wish to keep these fragrant petals.
The days go by, quite heedless of my longing.  Already we come to the end of a bitter spring.
Everything is against me and yet I go on hating to lose. The one thing I cannot overcome is a hatred of losing.
A nod from you is all it takes to win?  This somehow seems at odds with reality.
Pity me yet once more and lead me to her,  Assured that life and death are in your hands.
Spring went off with the blossoms that left the trees.  I wander lost under trees in mournful leaf.
At last I understand. This mournful mien Conceals a facile delight with showy blossoms.
When all is evanescence we all are sad,  And whose affairs dose 'sad' most aptly describe?
How true. We live, we die, not as we ask, And I must die without that one word 'sad.'
These blossoms, were they more within our reach,  Might seem to be of finer hue than the pine.
It is the lavender of all such flowers,  And yet it is not as I wish it were.
'Bamboo River,' not my favorite song,  But somewhat striking, its effect last night."
I looked to the bamboo river. It has run dry  And left an arid, barren world behind it.
She has left behind her mate, and these nestlings too.  Why have they lingered in this uncertain world?
I know now, as I see it leave the nest,  How uncertain is the lot of the waterfowl.
Unsheltered by the wing of the grieving father,  The nestling would surely have perished in the nest.
She who was with me, the roof above are smoke.  And why must I alone remain behind?
Wearily, my soul goes off to your mountains,  And cloud upon circling cloud holds my person back?
I am not as free as I seem. Prom the gloom of the world  I retreat only briefly to the Hill of Gloom.
From leaves that cannot withstand the mountain wind  The dew is falling. My tears fall yet more freely.
In the dawn I cannot see the path I took  To find Oyama of the Pines in mist.
Our mountain path, enshrouded whatever the season,  Is now closed off by the deeper mist of autumn.
Wet are my sleeves as the oars that work these shallows  For my heart knows the heart of the lady at the bridge.
With sodden sleeves the boatman plies the river.  So too these sleeves of mine, at mom, at night.
Sad are you, who have turned away from the world,  But sadder still my soul, taking leave of you.
Had we but life, we could watch it, ever taller,  The seedling pine unseen among the rocks.
Parting the mist, a sound comes in on the wind,  But waves of white, far out on the stream, roll between us.
On far shore and near, the waves may keep us apart.  Come in all the same, O breeze of the river Uji!
I have come, the mountain cherries at their best,  To break off sprays of blossom for my cap.
For sprays to break, the springtime wanderer pauses  Before the rustic fence, and wanders on.
I go, this hut of grass wil1 dry and fall.  But this solemn undertaking must last forever.
Your 'hut of grass' has sealed a pledge eternal.  It will not fal1, though ages come and go.
How is it in yon hills where the hart calls out  On such an eve, and dew forms on the hagi?
A mist of tears blots out this mountain village,  And at its rustic fence, the call of the deer.
The call of the hart whose mate has strayed away  In the morning mist―are there those whom it leaves unmoved?
The reeds, so sparse and fragile, have changed their color,  To make me think of sleeves that now are black.
Upon this sleeve, changed though its color be,  The dew finds refuge; there is no refuge for me.
As I gaze at an autumn sky closed off by mists,  Why must these birds proclaim that the world is fleeting?
For him, the mountain path has now been cut.  How can we look on the pine we watched as we waited?
Away in the hills, the snow departs from the pines  But comes again. Ah, would it were so with him!
Along the cliffs of these mountains, locked in snow,  Are the tracks of only one. That one is you.
My pony breaks the ice of the mountain river  As I lead the way with tidings from him who follows.
Beneath the oak I meant to search for shade.  Now it has gone, and all is vanity.
If he were here to pluck these mountain ferns,  Then might we find in them a sign of spring.
Without our father, how are we to praise  The cress that sends its shoots through banks of snow?
Last year along the way I saw those blossoms.  This year, no mist between, I mean to have them.
Our house is robed in densest mists of black.  Who undertakes to guide you to its blossoms?
We knot these braids in trefoil. As braided threads  May our fates be joined, may we be together always.
No way to thread my tears, so fast they flow;  As swiftly flows my life. Can such vows be?
The things by which one knows the mountain village  Are brought together in these voices of dawn.
Deserted mountain depths where no birds sing,  I would have thought. But sorrow has come to visit.
My mountain ladies have dyed it colors twain.  And which of the twain, please tel1 me, is the deeper?
Whatever the 'ladies' meant, the answer is clear:  The newer of these hues is far the deeper.
All the wide field abloom with maiden flowers!  Why must you string a rope to keep us out?
The maiden flowers on the misty morning field  Are set aside for those who bestir themselves.
A futile night. The guide of yestereve  Seems doomed to wander lost down the twilight road.
You walk a road you have chosen for yourself,  While helplessly we stumble on in darkness.
You cannot think that a trifling urge induced me  To brave, for you, that tangled, dew-drenched path?
We did not share a bed, I hear you say.  But we were together, that I must insist.
No barrier, perhaps, between our hearts;  But say not that our sleeves caress each other.
The lady at the bridge may steep her sleeves  In lonely midnight tears-but not for long.
That you will come again I do believe.  But must I wait for visits far between?
We saw yon trees in the spring, a blaze of flowers.  Beneath them too sad autumn now has stolen.
With flowers that fade, with leaves that turn, they speak  Most surely of a world where all is fleeting.
Regretfully, we leave the autumn groves  Whence autumn, unobserved, has slipped away.
The vine yet clings to the stone-walled mountain village,  Longer-lived than he whom once I knew.
Blow not harshly, wind from the mountain pines,  Through trees where sadness waxes as autumn wanes.
I do not propose to sleep among the young grasses.  But ensnared in them I must confess to be.
The sky I see is the usual nighttime sky.  Then why tonight do the showers increase my longing?
Here in our hail-flogged village, deep in the mountains,  The skies upon which we gaze are forever cloudy.
Forlorn the dawn, when on the frosty bank  The plovers sound their melancholy notes.
The plovers in the dawn, shaking off the frost:  Do they call to the heart of one now sunk in grief?
In mountains deep, where clouds turn back the sun,  Each day casts darker shadows upon my heart.
Uselessly they fall, these blood-red tears,  For they do not dye these robes in black remembrance.
My heart goes after yon retreating moon.  No home, this world m which to dwell forever.
Deep in the Snowy Mountains* would I vanish,  In search of the brew that is death for those who love.
Unsure has been the road over which I look back.  What can I know of the road that lies ahead?
The road ahead must needs be short, you tell me?  Then let us presume upon it while we may.
Through many a spring we plucked these shoots for him.  Today remembrance bids us do as well.
And to whom shall I show these early ferns from the mountain,  Plucked in remembrance of one who is no more?
This branch seems much in accord with him who breaks it.  I catch a secret scent beneath the surface.
I should have been more careful with my blossoms  I offer fragrance, get imputations back.
How quickly time does pass. You made and donned  Your mourning robes, and now the blossoms open.
Here where no visitor comes save only the tempest,  The scent of blossoms brings thoughts of days now gone.
The fragrance lasts of the plum my sleeve has brushed.  Uprooted now, must it dwell m a distant land?
Tears came first. I should have flung myself into  A stream of tears that would not have left me behind.
Deep though one plunges into the river of tears,  One comes upon occasional snags of remembrance.
And there they are, so busy getting ready,  And wet are the sleeves of the solitary fishwife.
Is it drier, my sleeve, than the brine-wet sleeve of the fishwife?  Sodden it is, from the waves upon which it floats.
You have lived to come upon these joyous days,  And are you not glad Old Gloomy* did not get you?
We do not forget to look back at one now gone;  But this day, of ail, our hearts must look ahead.
The moon comes forth from the mountain upon a world  That offers no home. It goes again to the mountain.
The boat setting forth on the undulant Lake of Loons,  Though badly rigged, did somehow make a landfall.
If I had found it at a common hedge,  I might have plucked it quite to suit my fancy.
A single chrysanthemum, left in a withered garden,  Withstands the frost, its color yet unfaded.
It lasts, I know, but as long as the dew upon it.  Yet am I drawn to the hue that fades with the morning.
Should I have taken the proffered morning glory  With the silver dew the blessing, still upon it?
Forlorn the flower that fades with the dew upon it.  Yet more forlorn the dew that is left behind.
Even the moon deigns to come to this dwelling of mine.  The night draws on, we await a sign of you.
Never, beneath the pines of that mountain village,  Did I know the autumn winds to lash at me so.
It droops, the maiden flower, as never before.  The dew this morning has left it all too swiftly.
My sorrows would have their limits, were I yet there.  The locust's call this autumn eve―I hate it!
Clandestine my rendezvous at Barrier River.  No good this sudden departure will do for my name.
Viewed from above, its waters may seem shallow.  But deep is Barrier River, its flow unceasing.
An autumn sky, to remind me of days of old:  I made my way in vain down a dew-drenched path.
Most friendly it was of him to give to your sleeve  The scent that maddens, sinks into the bones.
The familiar robe has been a source of comfort.  And now, for cause so paltry, must I lose it?
I shall not go on always and always resenting  The cord that now has bound you to another.
Memories of nights beneath the ivy  Bring comfort to the traveler's lonely sleep.
Sad must be the memory of lodging  Beneath this rotting ivy-covered tree.
The autumn grass is keeping something back.  Beneath the dew, it beckons and it beckons.
Weakly, weakly the wind glides over the grasses.  One knows that the moor is at the end of autumn.
Wisteria, thought I, to grace the august bonnet;  And my sleeve has caught upon a high, high branch.
Its fragrance shall last through all the centuries.  We shall not then be weary of it today.
The wisteria spray that graces the august bonnet  Competes with the purple clouds of paradise.
It sends its cascade of flowers to the loftiest heights.  Of a most uncommon hue is this wisteria.
I had heard the call of that strange and lovely bird, And parted the grasses, hoping to find its kin.
The permanent loan, if you please, of a useful image,  A handy memento, to take away the gloom.
To float downstream afresh at each atonement,  And yet to have forever at your side?
Of the plighted hagi, the upper leaves seem quiet.  What will have caused a change in the underleaves?
Had I known it to be of the meadow of Miyagi.  With the fragile hagi I would have kept my faith.
If I could think it a place apart from the world,  In happy procession then might pass the days.
Though it be in a house apart from this gloomy world,  I pray that the best may yet be mine to see.
They still flow on, these waters clear and clean.  Can they not reflect the image of those now gone?
Are there tangles of grass to hold me back, that I wait  So long in the ram at the eaves of your eastern cottage?
I think to find her equal, and my sleeves  Are deep in tears as the land in morning mist.
Autumn has come, the leaves of the ivy change;  And bright as of old, the moon of memories.
The village still calls itself Uji, and here in my rooms  The moon streams in upon another face.
Our seedling pine has not known many years.  I see for it, withal, a pine's long life.
The promise is made for all the ages to come,  But in these our lives we cannot be sure of the morrow.
Were life alone uncertain of the morrow,  Then might we count upon the heart of a man.
What shall I do? These tears run on ahead  And plunge the road I must go into utter darkness.
So narrow my sleeves, they cannot take my tears.  How then shall I make bold to keep you with me?
No need to grieve. The Uji bridge stands firm.  They too stand firm, the promises I have made you.
The bridge has gaps, one crosses gingerly.  Can one be sure it will not rot away?
A thousand years may pass, it will not waver,  This vow I make in the lee of the Islet of Oranges.
The colors remain, here on the Islet of Oranges.  But where go I, a boat upon the waters?
I pushed through snowy peaks, past icy shores,  Dauntless all the way-O daunting one!
The snow that blows to the shore remains there, frozen.  Yet worse my fate: I am caught, dissolve in midair.
I gaze your way in search of the clouds above you.  I see but darkness, so dreary these days of rain.
The long, dark rains go on, one's heart is dark.  Will it be so in yon village of rising waters?
'Gloom' is the name of Uji in Yamashiro.  It speaks of the lives of us who dwell in its compass.
I wish to be as the cloud that darkens the peak.  Better so than aimlessly drifting through life.
The tedious days of rain, incessant rain,  They speak to me of me. Yet wetter my sleeves.
It yet stands firm, the pine-clad mount of Sue,  Thought I. And even then the waves engulfed it!
I weep, I go―to lose myself!―where soar  No mountains but know the white of clinging clouds.
If in torment I cast myself away.  My sullied name will drift on after me.
Should I leave no trace behind in this gloomy world, What target then would you have for your complaints?
We shall think of meeting in another world  And not confuse ourselves with dreams of this.
Join my sobs to the fading toll of the bell,  To let her know that the end of my life has come.
It sings in the fields its muted song of the dead.  Your muted sobs may have joined it―to no avail.
Where orange blossoms summon memories  The cuckoo now should sing most cautiously.
Should even I, sad house, abandon you,  Who then will remember the ivy that offered shelter?
Pray think me not less feeling than the others.  But I am no one. Silent pass my days.
Yes, I know the sadness that all is fleeting.  But I did not mean that you should hear my sighs.
The autumn wind that brings the dew to the rushes,  It chills, it saddens most when evening comes.
Now through a field of riotous maiden flowers  I go, untouched by any drop of dew.
A flower whose name may suggest a want of judgment,  It does not bend for every passing dew.
Suppose you too have a nap among the flowers.  Then may we see how well you resist their hues.
I shall stay the night, if I have your invitation,  Though common hues. I warn you, tempt me not.
I see the drake fly, take it up in my hand.  Ah, here it is. I say―and it is gone.
Into a torrent of tears I flung myself,  And who put up the sluice that held me back?
Who in the city, now bathed in the light of the moon,  Will know that I yet drift on through the gloomy world?
O maiden flower, bend not to Adashino's gales.  I came the long road to make for you a windbreak.
We have brought the maiden flower to a hut of grass  Away from the world, and yet the world torments it.
'I wait,' said the voice from the pines; and I have come  And find myself wandering lost through dew-drenched reeds.
Though the dew on the autumn moors may have wet your sleeves,  You do wrong, O hunter to blame our weed-grown lodgings.
A stranger to the late-night moon in its glory  That he now disdains our house at the mountain ridge?
I shall watch till the moon goes behind the mountain ridge,  To see how it slips through the boards that roof your chamber.
Ancient things came back, I wept aloud  At koto and flute and a lady's haughty ways.
With the voice of your flute came thoughts of long ago,  And tears wet my sleeve, and sped you on your way.
On shoals unsought, I ask no further view  Of cedars twain beside that ancient river.
I know not the roots of the tree by the ancient river,  But it takes the place, for me. of one now gone.

In a mountain village, deep in the autumn night,  A lady who understands should understand.
The gloom of the world has been no part of my life, And how shall you call me one who understands?
A world I once renounced, for they and I  Had come to nothing, I now renounce again,
I thought that I should see the world no more,  And now, once more, 'no more' is my resolve.
Make haste, make haste, lest I be left behind.  The fisher boat even now rows far from the shore.
My soul may have left the shores of this gloomy world.  But on driftwood it floats, who knows to what far shore?
Harsh the winds that come down these mountain slopes.  Our trees are bare. They give not shade or shelter.
Mountain trees, I know, where none awaits me;  And yet I cannot easily pass them by.
You have chosen to turn your back upon the world.  It pains me to think that I have been the occasion.
I gaze at snow that swirls over mountain and moor,  And things long gone have still the power to sadden.
Their prize these shoots that break through the mountain snows.  My joy the abundant years you have before you.
On drifted moors I shall gather early shoots.  May years of your life add to years, as snow upon snow.
He whose sleeve brushed mine is here no more,  And yet is here in the scent of the dawning of spring.
I cannot halt the tears that join the flow  Of waters that gave her image, and do so no more.
Shall I, having taken the habit of the nun,  Now change to robes of remembrance, think of the past?
I lost my way in the hills, having taken a road  That would lead. I hope, to a teacher of the Law.

